## Covid Uniquely Disrupted the Labor Market

The pandemic posed a remarkable shock to the US economy, unmatched in impact by
any prior recession. The chart on the right queries FRED for PAYEMS, which
represents total nonfarm payroll. According to the St. Louis Fed, this
approximates 80% of the workers who contribute to GDP.

The chart exposes three major insights.

**First, no other recession in the last 70 years matches the severity of the
pandemic.** In % job losses relative to the peak, the pandemic is nearly three
times as dramatic as the 2007 financial crash.

**Second, and even more concerningly, the recovery has been slowing.** If this
trend continues, the latter half of the recovery has the potential to meet the
pace of the 2007 recovery which took over 2200 days to fully recover lost jobs.

**Third, labor markets have recovered slower relative to every new recession.**
Prior to 1981, the recovery time ranged between \~200 to \~600 days. In order,
the 1981 to 2001 labor market recoveries took about: 800 days, 1300 days, and
2200 days.

## Despite Powerful Monetary Policy

Monetary policy has roughly three four main tools: The Fed Funds Rate, Interest
on Reserves, Open Market Operations, and the 13(3) Lending Facilities.

The extraordinary scale of this pandemic has prompted an extraordinary response
from the Federal Reserve. The chart on the left queries FRED for Federal Debt
Held by Federal Reserve Banks as Percent of Gross Domestic Product
(HBFRGDQ188S).

This chart illustrates the scale of action and quickness of action. The Fed has
unleashed a host of lending facilities, large scale asset purchases, dollar swap
lines both as a response of flight-to-quality and call for stability. This
mostly results in the expansion of the balance sheet, where the Fed holds more
debt.

Compared to the Financial Crisis of 2007, monetary policy action can be
concluded to have been released in one large burst, around March. More so, the
pandemic policy action has been wider than the 2007 response. Programs such as
the TALF, MMLF, CPFF, and PDCFF have made a resurgence, along with the newly
made MLF, MSLF, PPPLF, CCF. This expansion of tools targets varied groups, from
municipalities to medium sized businesses.

At the same time, the depth of the response dramatically increased. QE1 in 2008
purchased GSE of \$100 billion, and MBS of \$500 billion. Contrasted, the Fed
originally claimed it would buy at least \$500 billion in Treasury securities
and \$200 billion in government-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities before
revising the statement to “the amounts needed to support smooth market
functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial
conditions.”

Between mid-March to mid-June, the Fed’s portfolio of securities grew from \$3.9
trillion to \$6.1 trillion.

## Despite Powerful Fiscal Policy

Fiscal Policy, or rather actions taken by Congress, has three main tools:
taxation, subsidies, and discretionary fiscal policy. For the most part, this
section will focus on discretionary fiscal policy which has played a vital role
during the pandemic.

When compared to the 2007 response, Fiscal Support has been remarkable. The
chart on the right queries Current Government Expenditures (FGEXPND). April 1st
represents a 92% percent increase from last year as a proxy of the increase in
government expenditures due to the pandemic.

As the chart illustrates, this increase is massive relative to normal
expenditures. That said, many Central Bankers are appealing for additional
fiscal stimulus. For example, Chair Powell on Oct 6th warned of “At this early
stage, I would argue that the risks of policy intervention are still asymmetric.
Too little support would lead to a weak recovery, creating unnecessary
hardship.” [^1]

[^1]: See
    https://www.wsj.com/articles/feds-powell-says-u-s-faces-tragic-risks-from-doing-too-little-to-support-economy-11601995201?mod=searchresults&page=1&pos=10

A chorus of other central bankers have been affirming this view. The September
Minutes, for example, stresses “if future fiscal support was significantly
smaller or arrived significantly later than they expected, the pace of the
recovery could be slower than anticipated.”

Officials such as Philadelphia Fed’s President Harker, Chicago Fed’s President
Evans, New York Fed’s President Williams, have all noted that forecasts of a
recovery hinged on fiscal policy. The sole exception within US central banking
officials seems to be the Saint Louis Fed President Bullard, “Even if you don’t
do that [pass a new package of fiscal policy], I think the same dynamic will
play out.” [^2]

[^2]: See
    https://www.wsj.com/amp/articles/derbys-take-as-trump-spikes-stimulus-talks-fed-views-on-need-for-fiscal-aid-vary-11602063001?mod=searchresults&page=1&pos=7

Fed officials lobbying for fiscal support is highly unusual when taken in the
context of central bank independence. [^3] The Boston Fed President Rosengren
points out that central bank independence is a form of “instrument independence”
but not “goal independence.” [^4] This lobbying speaks volumes during at a time
where, as pointed out by the ECB, central bank independence is already under
pressure, especially for the US. [^5]

[^3]: See
    https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-fiscal-federal-reserve-11602112823?mod=searchresults&page=1&pos=1

[^4]: See
    https://www.bostonfed.org/news-and-events/speeches/2019/central-bank-independence.aspx

[^5]: See https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecb.op248\~28bebb193a.en.pdf
