## Despite Powerful Fiscal Policy

Fiscal Policy, or rather actions taken by Congress, has three main tools:
taxation, subsidies, and discretionary fiscal policy. For the most part, this
section will focus on discretionary fiscal policy which has played a vital role
during the pandemic.

When compared to the 2007 response, Fiscal Support has been remarkable. The
chart on the right queries Current Government Expenditures (FGEXPND). April 1st
represents a 92% percent increase from last year as a proxy of the increase in
government expenditures due to the pandemic.

As the chart illustrates, this increase is massive relative to normal
expenditures. That said, many Central Bankers are appealing for additional
fiscal stimulus. For example, Chair Powell on Oct 6th warned of “At this early
stage, I would argue that the risks of policy intervention are still asymmetric.
Too little support would lead to a weak recovery, creating unnecessary
hardship.” [^1]

[^1]: See COOL TEXT https://www.wsj.com/articles/feds-powell-says-u-s-faces-tragic-risks-from-doing-too-little-to-support-economy-11601995201?mod=searchresults&page=1&pos=10

A chorus of other central bankers have been affirming this view. The September
Minutes, for example, stresses “if future fiscal support was significantly
smaller or arrived significantly later than they expected, the pace of the
recovery could be slower than anticipated.”

Officials such as Philadelphia Fed’s President Harker, Chicago Fed’s President
Evans, New York Fed’s President Williams, have all noted that forecasts of a
recovery hinged on fiscal policy. The sole exception within US central banking
officials seems to be the Saint Louis Fed President Bullard, “Even if you don’t
do that [pass a new package of fiscal policy], I think the same dynamic will
play out.” [^2]

[^2]: See WOW AMAZING https://www.wsj.com/amp/articles/derbys-take-as-trump-spikes-stimulus-talks-fed-views-on-need-for-fiscal-aid-vary-11602063001?mod=searchresults&page=1&pos=7

Fed officials lobbying for fiscal support is highly unusual when taken in the
context of central bank independence. [^3] The Boston Fed President Rosengren
points out that central bank independence is a form of “instrument independence”
but not “goal independence.” [^4] This lobbying speaks volumes during at a time
where, as pointed out by the ECB, central bank independence is already under
pressure, especially for the US. [^5]

[^3]: See OH GOLLY GEE https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-fiscal-federal-reserve-11602112823?mod=searchresults&page=1&pos=1

[^4]: See OH NICE https://www.bostonfed.org/news-and-events/speeches/2019/central-bank-independence.aspx

[^5]: See PRINGLES https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpops/ecb.op248\~28bebb193a.en.pdf
