## Despite Powerful Monetary Policy

Monetary policy has roughly three four main tools: The Fed Funds Rate, Interest
on Reserves, Open Market Operations, and the 13(3) Lending Facilities.

The extraordinary scale of this pandemic has prompted an extraordinary response
from the Federal Reserve. The chart on the left queries FRED for Federal Debt
Held by Federal Reserve Banks as Percent of Gross Domestic Product
(HBFRGDQ188S).

This chart illustrates the scale of action and quickness of action. The Fed has
unleashed a host of lending facilities, large scale asset purchases, dollar swap
lines both as a response of flight-to-quality and call for stability. This
mostly results in the expansion of the balance sheet, where the Fed holds more
debt.

Compared to the Financial Crisis of 2007, monetary policy action can be
concluded to have been released in one large burst, around March. More so, the
pandemic policy action has been wider than the 2007 response. Programs such as
the TALF, MMLF, CPFF, and PDCFF have made a resurgence, along with the newly
made MLF, MSLF, PPPLF, CCF. This expansion of tools targets varied groups, from
municipalities to medium sized businesses.

At the same time, the depth of the response dramatically increased. QE1 in 2008
purchased GSE of \$100 billion, and MBS of \$500 billion. Contrasted, the Fed
originally claimed it would buy at least \$500 billion in Treasury securities
and \$200 billion in government-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities before
revising the statement to “the amounts needed to support smooth market
functioning and effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial
conditions.”

Between mid-March to mid-June, the Fed’s portfolio of securities grew from \$3.9
trillion to \$6.1 trillion.